\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename ekg.info
@settitle ekg, the Emacs Knowledge Graph
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@set MAINTAINER Andrew Hyatt
@set MAINTAINEREMAIL @email{ahyatt@gmail.com}
@set MAINTAINERCONTACT @uref{mailto:ahyatt@gmail.com,contact the maintainer}
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* EKG: (ekg).           A note taking application for emacs using sqlite.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title ekg, the Emacs Knowledge Graph
@author Andrew Hyatt (@email{ahyatt@@gmail.com})
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top ekg, the Emacs Knowledge Graph

author:                Andrew Hyatt
@insertcopying

This is the ekg manual, which describes the operation and customization of the
ekg package.  All information here is relevant to the released version only.

The README is also informative, has screenshots, and can be found in the source
and in the git repository, which is at @uref{https://github.com/ahyatt/ekg}.

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::
* Installation::
* Changelog::
* Database::
* Concepts and data model in ekg::
* Understanding and editing the note buffer::
* Capturing notes::
* Viewing tags or notes::
* Magic tags::
* The trash::
* Links to ekg in org-mode::
* Importing from org-roam::
* Backups::
* Database maintenance::
* Customizing ekg with hooks::
* Integration with ekg::
* Extras::
* Design::

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Installation

* Sqlite dependency::
* Installing via Melpa::
* Installing by hand::

Changelog

* Version 0.6.4: Version 064. 
* Version 0.6.3: Version 063. 
* Version 0.6.2: Version 062. 
* Version 0.6.1: Version 061. 
* Version 0.6.0: Version 060. 
* Version 0.5.1: Version 051. 
* Version 0.5: Version 05. 
* Version 0.4.3: Version 043. 
* Version 0.4.2: Version 042. 
* Version 0.4.1: Version 041. 
* Version 0.4: Version 04. 
* Version 0.3.3: Version 033. 
* Version 0.3.2: Version 032. 
* Version 0.3.1: Version 031. 
* Version 0.3: Version 03. 
* Version 0.2.1: Version 021. 
* Version 0.2: Version 02. 

Understanding and editing the note buffer

* Note properties::
* Note text::
* Drafts::
* A warning about org-mode::

Capturing notes

* Templates::
* Changing the initial tags of a note::
* Inline commands::

Viewing tags or notes

* Commands in the notes buffer::
* Customizing note display in @samp{ekg-notes-mode}::

Extras

* Embeddings::
* Logseq::
* LLM::
* Auto save::
* Denote::
* Email::

Logseq

* Exporting::
* Importing::

LLM

* Augmenting notes with LLM output::
* Using ekg notes as prompts::
* Querying your ekg database::

Design

* The triple database::
* The metadata section::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

The ekg module is a simple but opinionated note taking application, for emacs.
It is a substitute for such other emacs applications such as org-roam or denote.
ekg stands for @emph{emacs knowledge graph}.

Data is completely stored in a sqlite database.  Notes are organized around
tags, and you can view many notes by looking at one or more tags.  This provides
a read-only view of various notes, which you can navigate between and choose to
edit in a separate buffer.

The editing of notes combines the editing of the text of the note with various
properties stored in the database such as the tags of the note.

@node Installation
@chapter Installation

@menu
* Sqlite dependency::
* Installing via Melpa::
* Installing by hand::
@end menu

@node Sqlite dependency
@section Sqlite dependency

If using Emacs version 29, you likely have @samp{sqlite} as a library compiled into
Emacs.  Prior versions use @samp{emacsql} for access to sqlite.  If you are using a
pre-Emacs 29 version, you need to have @samp{sqlite} installed on your system.

@node Installing via Melpa
@section Installing via Melpa

This is the easiest and recommended way to install ekg.  If you have not set up
Melpa yet, follow the instructions at @uref{https://melpa.org/#/getting-started}.

There is no need to use Melpa Stable, because development happens in a branch
and is not integrated until it is deemed stable.  When bugs are discovered,
fixes are pushed to the main branch soon, so it is usually a good idea to keep
your version up to date.

There are many ways to use Melpa to download ekg, but using @samp{use-package} is the
easiest way, and recommended because it allows you to get the pacakge and
configure it in one place.  An example use is below.

@lisp
(use-package ekg
  :bind (([f11] . ekg-capture)))
@end lisp

@node Installing by hand
@section Installing by hand

If you wish to install by hand, you need to make sure to install the triples
library, found in GNU ELPA, and at @uref{https://github.com/ahyatt/triples}.

Clone the ekg library, from whatever branch you would like to use (@samp{main}
corresponds to the release version, and @samp{develop} is where development of the
next version happens).  Add your source directory and require ekg.  The
following is an example assuming you cloned ekg into @samp{~/src/ekg}, and the
triples library is already installed.

@lisp
(add-to-list 'load-path "~/src/ekg")
(require 'ekg)
@end lisp

@node Changelog
@chapter Changelog

@menu
* Version 0.6.4: Version 064. 
* Version 0.6.3: Version 063. 
* Version 0.6.2: Version 062. 
* Version 0.6.1: Version 061. 
* Version 0.6.0: Version 060. 
* Version 0.5.1: Version 051. 
* Version 0.5: Version 05. 
* Version 0.4.3: Version 043. 
* Version 0.4.2: Version 042. 
* Version 0.4.1: Version 041. 
* Version 0.4: Version 04. 
* Version 0.3.3: Version 033. 
* Version 0.3.2: Version 032. 
* Version 0.3.1: Version 031. 
* Version 0.3: Version 03. 
* Version 0.2.1: Version 021. 
* Version 0.2: Version 02. 
@end menu

@node Version 064
@section Version 0.6.4

@itemize
@item
Fix display of extended structured data in notes.
@item
Add contrib directory and @samp{ekg-email} as a contribution to import emails to notes in a structured way.
@item
Fix inlines not expanding in the contextual notes in @samp{ekg-llm}.
@item
Set @samp{default-directory} to db location in notes buffers (by @uref{https://github.com/monkpearman, S Pearman}).
@end itemize

@node Version 063
@section Version 0.6.3

@itemize
@item
Fix issue in trying to get a single-valued item to show up in the metadata line.
@item
Remove the never-used named, email, and person schema.
@item
Fix issue with tag completions triggering incorrectly if they contained spaces.
@item
Fix error when displaying unknown schema.
@item
Improve JSONification of notes when sending context to LLMs.
@end itemize

@node Version 062
@section Version 0.6.2

@itemize
@item
Add export to @uref{https://github.com/protesilaos/denote, denote} (by @uref{https://github.com/jayrajput, Jay Rajput})
@end itemize

@node Version 061
@section Version 0.6.1

@itemize
@item
Run tag hooks when a valid tag is typed, instead of relying on completion, which often doesn't work.
@item
Fix issue in @samp{markdown-mode} where the beginning of the tag values was incorrectly read-only.
@item
Allow emojis as tags.
@end itemize

@node Version 060
@section Version 0.6.0

@itemize
@item
Add tag and similar notes to the context when having LLMs add to or replace
notes.  @code{ekg-llm-default-instructions} replaces the previous variable,
@code{ekg-llm-default-prompt} (because the prompt now contains the instructions).
@item
Add inline links for Markdown, as wiki links.
@end itemize

@node Version 051
@section Version 0.5.1

@itemize
@item
Improve regex for inline tag linkification so we linkify more valid inline tags.
@item
Improve logseq import to import notes without org structure, and use filetags.
@item
Fix inline tag bug that test and real failures.
@end itemize

@node Version 05
@section Version 0.5

@itemize
@item
Simplified trashed tags from using tag prefixes to using a simple trash tag (@samp{ekg-trash-tag}).
@item
Added @samp{ekg-show-notes-with-tag-prefix}.
@item
Add tags while writing the body of notes by completing with "#".  See @ref{Note text} section for details.
@item
Added functionality so that org-mode commands, and potentially others, narrow automatically so the metadata line and the read-only nature don't mess things up.  See @ref{Note text} section for details.
@item
@samp{ekg-auto-save}, a new module by @uref{https://github.com/qingshuizheng, Qingshui Zheng}.
@item
Added canceling a note as an actual command, also by  @uref{https://github.com/qingshuizheng, Qingshui Zheng}.
@item
Fix issue with trashing notes with tags that are partially trashed.
@item
Saving while editing a note will no longer add the draft tag.  This means that if you are editing a draft, it will not keep it as a draft, so it will become a normal note.
@item
Fix issue with using ekg-llm with vertex, which doesn't understand system prompts.
@item
Fix metadata face which didn't work well with all themes - now the metadata section is just bolded.
@item
Improve display regenerating embeddings via @samp{ekg-embedding-generate-all}.
@item
Change multi-title note display from using newlines to commas
@item
Made deleting titles and resources possible, and properly skipped empty properties for multi-line propeties.
@item
Handle backup errors better, warning and proceding if not a forced backup, erroring out with a better message if forced.
@item
Don't show trashed notes in drafts.
@end itemize

@node Version 043
@section Version 0.4.3

@itemize
@item
Added autoloads
@item
Fixed issue that could occur when saving with malformed buffers.
@end itemize

@node Version 042
@section Version 0.4.2

@itemize
@item
Switch LLM chat output to streaming when available.
@item
Fix inclusion of title-based transclusion ">t", which included the "t" as part of the completion.
@item
Fix tag renaming possibly causing duplication.
@item
Ensure renamed tags are normalized.
@item
Support metadata where fields are specified via multiple property lines and make "title" such a field, so now titles can have commas.
@end itemize

@node Version 041
@section Version 0.4.1

@itemize
@item
Fix issues using default emacs in-buffer completion, and allowing completion in places we shouldn't.
@item
Add @samp{ekg-embedding-generate-on-save} and @samp{ekg-embedding-disable-generate-on-save} to turn off generating embeddings for notes.
@end itemize

@node Version 04
@section Version 0.4

@itemize
@item
Added ability to save in-progress notes.
@item
Added "magic tags", tags that cause elisp to be executed.  See the @ref{Magic tags, , magic tags} section for more detail.
@item
Added @samp{ekg-llm}, a separate module, so LLMs can append to or rewrite notes, using other notes as prompts.  As with ekg-embeddings, a Open API key is required.
@item
Added @samp{ekg-capture-file} to save notes associated with a file, or go that same note.
@item
Depend on the @uref{https://github.com/ahyatt/llm, llm package} for embeddings and llm functionality, so the user can choose different providers.
@item
Improved @samp{ekg-clean-db} to fix bugs and change empty-note deletion logic.
@item
Improved @samp{ekg-embedding} package to make it more robust to missing embeddings (like what can happen if you save notes without loading the package first).
@item
Added commas to the tag header.
@item
Made separator in @samp{ekg-capture-mode} and @samp{ekg-edit-mode} customizable.
@item
Fixed display of org notes to have properly formatted links and images.  Links can be opened with @samp{[C-c o]}.
@item
Fixed bug where in embedding search and buffer similarity, the highest match was discarded.
@item
Fixed bug in title transclusion for company users.
@item
Changed template behavior to also use parent tags (so templates on "foo" tag, will work if the note tag is "foo/bar").

Thanks to contributors @uref{https://github.com/Gleek, Gleek} and @uref{https://github.com/qingshuizheng, Qingshui Zheng}.
@end itemize

@node Version 033
@section Version 0.3.3

@itemize
@item
Fix native compilation errors.  Upgrade to triples version 0.3.5, which contains more important bug fixes.
@end itemize

@node Version 032
@section Version 0.3.2

@itemize
@item
Upgrade to triples version 0.3.2, which contains important bug fixes.
@end itemize

@node Version 031
@section Version 0.3.1

@itemize
@item
Upgrade to triples module 0.3, which changes how integers are stored in the built-in sqlite (for users of Emacs 29+).  Users of sqlite will have their database automatically upgraded.  A backup will always be made beforehand - you may want to find it (alongside your normal emacs backups), and make sure to keep it around in case the upgrade went wrong in some way.  @strong{Important: if you created your database before this version on the built-in sqlite, and afterwards switched to emacsql, you must switch back to the built-in sqlite for the upgrade.}
@item
Store the ekg version in the database so we know when we need to do updates in the future.
@item
Remove older database updates that should no longer be needed.
@item
Ensure we always are connected to the database before any call to the database happens.
@item
Make ekg-close interactive.
@item
Fixes to ignore bad embeddings which otherwise would cause errors.
@item
Added the ability to kill notes in a notes view, which does not change the database, it only alters the view.  Thanks to Jay Rajput for the contribution!
@item
Fix for tag cleanups, which were sometimes not cleaned up if the tag had other data (such as embeddings).
@item
Added variable @samp{ekg-embedding-text-selector} with a default function so that large notes can have their embeddings taken.
@item
Added @samp{ekg-get-notes-with-title}, which is offered as a useful function for clients.
@end itemize

@node Version 03
@section Version 0.3

@itemize
@item
Added inline commands, see the @ref{Inline commands, , inlines} section for more detail.
@item
Added customization of note display, using inline commands.
@item
Added logseq import / export in its own module, and removed it from the @samp{ekg-org-roam} module.  See the @ref{Logseq, , logseq} section for more details.
@item
Improve window management, now we play nicer with customized window configuration, and now opening a list of notes will also switch to that window.
@item
Improved metadata overlay look and function, it now looks just like @samp{message-mode}, which hopefully will help with people's intuitions on how it works.
@item
Added a blank line between notes in notes list buffers, for a cleaner look.
@item
Renamed @samp{ekg-rename-tag} to @samp{ekg-global-rename-tag} to clarify this isn't for changing an individual tag in a note.
@item
Added arg prefix behavior to @samp{ekg-notes-delete} to allow deleting notes without a warning.
@item
Made @samp{ekg-capture} have unique buffer names, so the user can capture multiple notes at the same time.
@end itemize

Thanks especially to users and contributors: @uref{https://github.com/jayrajput, Jay Rajput}, @uref{https://github.com/qingshuizheng, Qingshui Zheng}, And @uref{https://github.com/cuprum, cuprum}.

@node Version 021
@section Version 0.2.1

@itemize
@item
Removed @samp{ekg-notes-remove}, which removed one or more tags from a note from a note list buffer.
@item
New keybinding, "q" in the notes buffer, which kills the buffer (thanks to Jay Rajput for the idea).
@end itemize

@node Version 02
@section Version 0.2

@itemize
@item
Added hooks @code{ekg-add-schema-hook}, @code{ekg-note-pre-save-hook}, @code{ekg-note-save-hook}, @code{ekg-note-delete-hook}, and @code{ekg-note-add-tag-hook}  to enable customization.
@item
New commands @samp{ekg-show-notes-latest-captured}, @samp{ekg-show-notes-latest-modified}, for showing notes created or modified recently.
@item
Introduced variable @code{ekg-notes-size} to control the default page size for limited views such as @samp{ekg-show-notes-latest-captured}.
@item
Added templating.
@item
Added embedding as an optional add-on, to enable note similarity and note search; requires an account at OpenAI or similar embedding provider.
@item
Added new function @code{ekg-active-notes} to easily get all non-trashed notes.
@item
Improved ability to have note list buffers that have flexible titles and operation, notably improving the @samp{ekg-show-notes-in-trash} command.
@item
Standardized buffer names for @samp{ekg-notes-mode} buffers, which all are prepended with "ekg" and surrounded by asterisks, to denote that they are non-file-based.
@item
Added the documentation you are reading right now.
@item
Fixed bug interfering with completion at the beginning of the tag property line.
@item
Fix for @code{ekg-notes-refresh} incorrectly calling @code{ekg--show-notes}.
@end itemize

@node Database
@chapter Database

By default, ekg uses the default triple database, which is set in the variable
@code{triples-default-database-filename}.  The default value of this is
@samp{~/.emacs.d/triples.db}.  You can specify a different name if you want the ekg
database to not be shared with any other user of the triple package, by
customizing the variable @code{ekg-db-file}.  When this is @code{nil}, it leaves the
filename up to the triples package.

@node Concepts and data model in ekg
@chapter Concepts and data model in ekg

The ekg package is built on a flexible database scheme called "triples", where
everything is stored as a graph structure: a subject, a predicate, and an
object.  The implication for the ekg package is that new kinds of data are easy
to add, and live alongside other data.  Values of properties, stored as "objects",
can themselves have values by adding data where the same value is the
"subject".  If you plan to do extensive integration work in elisp, it will help
to understand these concepts, and the best way to do so is reading the triples
package README@.

For notes, we can think of the subject of the triples as an ID@.  Notes are
created, and have the following types by default, with the type having
properties.
@itemize
@item
@samp{tagged}: Tags
@item
@samp{text}: Text, its major mode, and any inline commands.
@item
@samp{time-tracked}: Creation time and modification time
@item
@samp{titled}: Title
@end itemize

The ID for notes is by default an integer UUID@.  However, you can have notes
about anything.  In EKG an ID can be a resource identifier as well, such as a
URL@.  When this happens, the ID is interesting data in its own right.

Tags may have spaces, but cannot have commas, which are used to separate them
when showing them to the user and parsing them back out into properties to
store.  Tags also may not contain uppercase letters.

Because of the triples model, there is data about the tags for each note.  Tags
themselves just have type markers indicating they are tags, and can dynamically
query for all notes with their tag, so tags always have a current list of notes
with their tag.

@node Understanding and editing the note buffer
@chapter Understanding and editing the note buffer

When capturing or creating a note, the note buffer has two areas important to
understand.  The first is the area for note properties, which has a different
background color.  The second is the area for the note text.

@menu
* Note properties::
* Note text::
* Drafts::
* A warning about org-mode::
@end menu

@node Note properties
@section Note properties

The properties shown in the note property area come from the data stored in the
database for the entity.  At a minimum, there will be tags.

@noindent
A property is displayed with a label, and the value, such as
@quotation
Tags: emacs, ekg

@end quotation

@noindent
Changing these values, when saving the note, will change the values that will be
stored in the database.

@noindent
New properties can be added manually, so if you wanted a title, you can add it
to the property list.
@quotation
Title: This is my title

@end quotation

@noindent
It's important to note that everything in the section with the different
background color is a property and will be treated as such.  Text that doesn't
look like a property there will cause problems, and properties outside this area
will instead be treated as note text.  The end of the property section ends with
an uneditable "--text follows this line--", below which the text of the note
starts.

@noindent
Not every property has a representation in the property list, only the
properties which users may want to change manually.

@noindent
Tag properties have completion to tags built-in, so when adding tags to a note
you can choose from available tags.  Or you may add a new tag that has not yet
been used.

@noindent
Ekg makes some effort to make sure that the user doesn't accidentally extend the
property section without adding actual properties, since this will likely result
in a confusing experience for the user.

@node Note text
@section Note text

Below is the property section is the note section. The text could be anything
(or nothing). This is the body text of the note, where you write down whatever
you want to note about, that is relevant to the tags for the note.

There are three modes for the note text: @samp{text-mode}, @samp{markdown-mode}, and @samp{org-mode}.
More can be added by customizing the variable @code{ekg-acceptable-modes}, just make
sure its a mode that makes sense for notes. The default mode is configured in
@code{ekg-capture-default-mode}, but can be changed when capturing with the command
@samp{ekg-change-mode}.

The note text provides various options for completions. The most common
completion is typing tags inline while writing notes. These tags will be added
to the note automatically upon saving, regardless of whether completion is used
or not. The tag completion is triggered by the "#" symbol. In @samp{org-mode}, if
@samp{ekg-linkify-inline-tags} is set to non-nil (which is the default), the tag will
be turned into an org link to the tag. It is necessary to enclose the tag in
square brackets to be detected as an inline tag.  In @samp{markdown-mode}, the tag will
be turned into a wiki link (denoted by double square brackets).  It is
acceptable to finish the completion with a tag that is not currently defined, as
the tag will be added when the note is saved. The detection of plaintext tags of
various types can be turned off by setting @samp{ekg-inline-populate-inline-text-tags}
to @samp{nil}. There are other customizable tag symbols available, indicating different
prefixes. By default, in addition to the "#" symbol (representing a tag with
that name), there is also the "@@" symbol for tags prefixed with "person/", and
the "!" symbol for tags prefixed with "idea/".  These other symbols and the
prefixes they mean are controlled by
@samp{ekg-inline-custom-tag-completion-symbols}. By default, we have "@@" which will
denote a tag with the "person/" prefix, and "!" which will denote a tag with the
"idea/" prefix.  So if, in either @samp{org-mode} or @samp{markdown-mode}, the text has the
following:

@example
Everything related to #[emacs] should be colored #ffa500.  This is the opinion of @@[rms].
@end example

the tags that will be detected are "emacs" and, because of the special "@@"
prefix that indicates a tag prefix, "person/rms". The color will not be picked
up as a tag, because it is not enclosed in brackets. This helps us avoid false
positives.

There is no functionality to remove inline tags that are deleted in the tag
section. If an inline tag is not deleted in the note text, the tag will be
re-added. 

Another type of completion is for inline commands, the ">t" completion,
mentioned in the @ref{Inline commands}.

The metadata section above the notes often can be problematic for some commands,
especially org commands. Because of this, before commands are executed, we check
the command name against the @samp{ekg-command-regex-for-narrowing}, and if there is a
match to one of the regexes, we narrow to the note section just when the command
is running. It defaults to all org-insert commands and @code{org-meta-return}, but if
there are any weird behaviors caused by the metadata section, consider
customizing this variable. Right now this just works for keybindings, and not
using @code{execute-extended-command}.

@node Drafts
@section Drafts

Notes can be saved midway through editing, both for capturing and editing notes.
The normal buffer-save keybinding (typically C-x C-s) will save a draft.  A
draft is like a normal note, but has a special tag, by default "draft".  (This
can be customized in @samp{ekg-draft-tag}.)  Having this tag means the note doesn't
show up in most views, much like the notes in "trash".  Once a note is saved
normally, it loses the draft tag.

See also the section on the @ref{Auto save, , auto save}, to see how to turn on and set up auto
save, which can automatically save drafts for new notes.

@node A warning about org-mode
@section A warning about org-mode

Org-mode notes are primarily to use org-mode formatting on.  Org-mode has a lot
of funtionality, but much of it depends on the assumption that the buffer is all
for use by org-mode (not true in this case, because of the properties portion),
and the assumption that the buffer is visiting a file, which is also not
true.  In particular, attachments will not work, and ekg-notes cannot be added to
the agenda.

@node Capturing notes
@chapter Capturing notes

@samp{ekg-capture} is the command to capture a note.  In ekg this is probably the most
frequently used command.  It will create a new buffer called @samp{*EKG Capture*}.  By
default, it will have the current date tag, such as "date/2023-02-21".

@noindent
@samp{ekg-capture-url} will capture a note associated with a URL resource, and with
a given title as the title of the page.  The idea is that the note is annotating
the reference itself as a "literature note".  The title also appears as a tag,
so other notes can reference this if needed.  For example, if the URL is
@uref{http://example.com}, and the title is "An example URL", the properties buffer
will have the following:

@quotation
Resource: @uref{http://example.com}
Tags: doc/an example url, date/2023-02-25
Title: An example URL

@end quotation

Capturing URLs is a bit clunky as is.  If you can wrap it in a function to
supply the name and url of the active browser tab, then you can create a much
easier experience.  The following is an example for users of Google Chrome on
Mac OS X@.

@lisp
(defun my/ekg-capture-url ()
  (interactive)

  (ekg-capture-url
   (do-applescript "tell application \"Google Chrome\" to return URL of active tab of front window")
   (do-applescript "tell application \"Google Chrome\" to return Title of active tab of front window")))
@end lisp

@noindent
URL can also point to local files, which will be browsed using @samp{find-file} by
default.  The idea is that you can tag files and folders to make them easier to
find.  Here is an example note similar to web address URL:

@quotation
Resource: @uref{file:///Users/andrewhyatt/notes/20230510T162600__emacs_init-file.org}
Tags: doc/emacs config, date/2023-05-13, emacs/init
Title: Emacs Config

@end quotation

You can use the function @samp{ekg-capture-file} to either capture or edit a note
associated with a file from a buffer visiting that file.  (If there is already a
note associated with the buffer's file, the note will be opened.)  You can use
this to store TODOs and other notes about a file.

ekg opens web addresses in a browser using @samp{browse-url} and everything else in
Emacs using @samp{find-file}.

@noindent
A final way to capture notes comes from a buffer that is viewing a list of
notes, in @samp{ekg-notes-mode}.  You can call @samp{ekg-notes-create}, which will capture
a new note with whatever tags (if any) are associated with the notes buffer.

@noindent
To save any note that is being captured, press @samp{C-c C-c} or call
@samp{ekg-capture-finalize}.  To cancel, just kill the buffer.  You can also abort with @samp{C-c C-k}, or @samp{ekg-capture-abort}, which will not only kill the buffer but delete any draft saved.

@menu
* Templates::
* Changing the initial tags of a note::
* Inline commands::
@end menu

@node Templates
@section Templates

Ekg comes with a built-in way to have templates.  When you add a tag to a note,
ekg searches for notes with both the tag being added, and the tag "template".
Any note with those two tags will be added by default to the text of the buffer.

For example, if there is a note with tags "daily reflection" and "template",
with the text "What did you learn today?", adding the tag "daily reflection" to
a note will cause the text "What did you learn today?" to appear.  The parents
of tags are also searched, so the same thing will happen if the tag you add is
"daily reflection/morning" - it will get the template for "daily reflection" as
long as it exists.

The adding of templates happens whether intially when setting up the capture
buffer, or later when the user types a tag that is a valid tag.  Because of
this, it's best to avoid adding templates to tags that are prefixes of other
tags you'd like to use, but don't want the template on, because as soon as ekg
sees the prefix that's a valid tag being typed, it will trigger that tag's
templates.

You can choose a tag other than "template" as the trigger for this templating
behavior, by customizing @code{ekg-template-tag}.

This functionality is enabled through the function
@samp{ekg-on-add-tag-insert-template} in the variable @code{ekg-note-add-tag-hook}, and
can be turned off by removing it from that hook.

@lisp
(remove-hook 'ekg-note-add-tag-hook #'ekg-on-add-tag-insert-template)
@end lisp

@node Changing the initial tags of a note
@section Changing the initial tags of a note

The variable @code{ekg-capture-auto-tag-funcs} has a list of functions to call to add
tags.  Each function is called, and returns a list of tags (or @code{nil}, the empty
list), which are all added to a new note.  By default, this variable has the
function @samp{ekg-date-tag}, which returns the tag of today's date.  If you do not
want this, you can remove this function.  You can also add your own functions to
add the year, the week number, or any tag you feel is appropriate.

@node Inline commands
@section Inline commands

An inline command is a way to insert generated content into notes.  A command
has a representation, and can be evaluated.  The representation is an
s-expression limited to a subset of functions.  An example of a representation
is "My .emacs file: %(transclude-file \"~/.emacs.d/init.el\")".  When you are
capturing or editing the note, you can create this representation, or see one
already created.  When viewing the note in a notes buffer, the inline command is
evaluated and the results are inserted into the note.

There are two kinds of inline commands: a normal command, and a note command.  A
normal command can do anything, and takes the form "%(<command> <arg 1> <arg 2>
@dots{} <arg n>)".  In other words, this is just like an elisp function call, except
with a "%" in front.  When executing one of these we look for a function
starting with @samp{ekg-inline-command-}.  So, for example, we have the following
commands available for use:

@itemize
@item
@samp{%(transclude-note id <numwords>)}: Include the contents of another note.
@samp{numwords} is optional, and controls the maximum number of words to include.
If not included, there is no limit.
@item
@samp{%(transclude-file filename <numwords>)}: Include the contents of a file.
@samp{numwords} functions the same here as in @samp{transclude-note}.
@item
@samp{%(transclude-website url <numwords>)}: Include the contents of a website.  As
of now, no attempt is made to only include the "main content", so this is best
suited to simple text sites that have content without any navigational
elements.
@end itemize

These are defined in @code{ekg-inline-command-transclude-note}, and so on.  A user
can define new commands just by creating new functions that fit this pattern.
All of these will be executed and content calculated every time the note
containing them is re-displayed.  Note that there is currently no automatic
refresh when the content being transcluded changes.

The other kind of inline command is a note command.  These function similarly to
normal inline commands, with the key difference that the form is now
"%n(<command> <arg 1> <arg 2> @dots{} <arg n>)"; note the "n" in front.  The
difference here is that there is an implicit first argument that is the note
that is being displayed in the current context.  After that note argument "<arg
1>" and so on will be added.  These are used primarily for controlling the
read-only display of notes in notes lists.  The note commands are primarily
driven by types, with the idea that a note can have many types, and each type
has a note command that displays information related to that type.  Note
commands are defined in functions with the prefix @samp{ekg-display-note-}.  The
following note commands exist:

@itemize
@item
@samp{%n(id <force>)}: Shows the ID of the note, if it is interesting.  Interesting
mainly means it isn't a random-seeming ID that we normally generate for notes,
and is instead some sort of resource.  If @samp{force} is true, then show it
whether it is interesting or not.
@item
@samp{%n(text <numwords>)}: The text of a note (with any inline commands calculated
and their results displayed inline).  @samp{numwords} functions as noted above.
@item
@samp{%n(tagged)}: The tags of a note.
@item
@samp{%n(time-tracked <format-str>)}: The created and modified time of a note.
@samp{format-str}, if passed, controls how the times are formatted (see
documentation for @code{format-time-string}, default is @code{%Y-%m-%d}).
@item
@samp{%n(titled)}: The title of a note.
@item
@samp{%n(other)}: A special note command that will substitute itself with all
type-relevant note commands that haven't already appeared.  So, for example,
if there is a type such as @samp{person}, and a note has information with this
type, that information will be shown in the @samp{other} command, as if it was
substituted by @samp{%n(person)}.  However, if @samp{%n(person)} already appears as a
command, it will not add it again in the @samp{other} command.
@end itemize

The @samp{%n(id <force>)} is implemented in @code{ekg-display-note-id}, @samp{%n(text
<numwords>)} is implemented in @code{ekg-display-note-text}, and so on.  All these
are designed to be useful for customizing the note display (see @ref{Customizing note display in @samp{ekg-notes-mode}, , Customizing note
display in ekg-notes-mode}).  Because we want to have these possibly not insert
anything, each function must end with a newline if the content is likely to be
needing a line to itself.  The functions must always return a string.  Although
the default note commands are all based around types, a note command could be
anything that needs a note.

Inlines can be added by simply typing them, or a few special commands.
@samp{ekg-edit-add-inline} will add an inline note or file.  For notes, it will
prompt to select a note by title or tag and then text.  For files, it will
prompt for the file name.  The other way is to use completion at point, by
typing ">t" and completing by notes with titles.  After completion, the ">t"
will be replaced with the correct @samp{transclude-note} command that refers to the
titled note selected.  This is only useful for notes with titles, since they are
more easily selected by completion.

@node Viewing tags or notes
@chapter Viewing tags or notes

There are several functions to view notes in various ways.  All of these show a
list of notes in read-only view, that can be navigated and interacted with.
This is a @samp{ekg-notes-mode} buffer.

@samp{ekg-show-notes-with-tag} will show all notes tagged with the given tag.

@samp{ekg-show-notes-with-any-tags} will show all notes that have any of the tags given.

@samp{ekg-show-notes-with-all-tags} will show all notes that have all of the tags given.

@samp{ekg-show-notes-for-today} will show the notes taken today.

@samp{ekg-show-notes-latest-captured} will show a number of notes from newest to
oldest.  The number is 20 by default, but can be changed by customizing
@code{ekg-notes-size}.

@samp{ekg-show-notes-latest-modified} will show a number of notes from newest to
oldest, but by modification time, not by creation time.  The number is also 20
by default and can be changed by customizing @code{ekg-notes-size}.

@samp{ekg-show-notes-in-trash} will show the notes in the trash (see the @ref{The trash, , trash}
section for details on how this works).

@menu
* Commands in the notes buffer::
* Customizing note display in @samp{ekg-notes-mode}::
@end menu

@node Commands in the notes buffer
@section Commands in the notes buffer

The notes buffer is navigated via the following commands (the default binding is
also given):

@samp{ekg-notes-tag} (@samp{t}), open another notes buffer showing notes with one of the
tags of current note.

@samp{ekg-notes-open} (@samp{o}), edit the currently selected note.

@samp{ekg-notes-delete} (@samp{d}), trash the current note (or, if this is the trash list,
truly delete it).

@samp{ekg-notes-browse} (@samp{b}), open the resource attached to the current note, if it
exists, otherwise do nothing.

@samp{ekg-notes-select-and-browse-url} (@samp{B}), select from all the titles of URL
resources in the any of the notes, and browse the URL@.

@samp{ekg-notes-refresh} (@samp{g}), refresh the list of notes in the current buffer, to
make sure any new notes or removed notes are updated in the list.

@samp{ekg-notes-create} (@samp{c}), capture a new note with all the tags associated with
the list.

@samp{ekg-notes-next} (@samp{n}), move selection to the next note.

@samp{ekg-notes-previous} (@samp{p}), move selection to the previous node.

@samp{ekg-notes-any-note-tags} (@samp{a}), open a new notes list showing any of the tags
that appear in the selected note.

@samp{ekg-notes-any-tags} (@samp{A}), open a new notes list showing any of the tags that
appear in any of the notes in the note list.  For example, if the buffer was
displaying notes with tag @samp{emacs}, and there are two notes displayed, one with
tags @samp{emacs} and @samp{org-mode}, and the other with @samp{emacs} and @samp{ekg}, a new buffer
displaying notes with any of the tags @samp{emacs}, @samp{org-mode}, or @samp{ekg} is created.

@samp{ekg-notes-kill} (@samp{k}), kill a note from the current view.  This only removes
the note from the current buffer; the database is not changed.  If the view is
refreshed, the note will come back.

@samp{q} will kill the notes buffer.

Many of these commands use the notion that notes lists have associated lists of
tags.  That is the case for many commands, but not all.  For example,
@samp{ekg-show-notes-latest-captured}, @samp{ekg-show-notes-latest-modified}, and
@samp{ekg-show-notes-in-trash} have no associated tags.

@node Customizing note display in @samp{ekg-notes-mode}
@section Customizing note display in @samp{ekg-notes-mode}

The main way to customize displays is via the variable
@code{ekg-display-note-template}, which is a string that has inline commands in it
(normally inline note commands).  See the @ref{Inline commands, , inlines} section for more details on
these commands.  Through changing this, the ordering or inclusion of various
type-related information can be configured, or extra text added, or anything,
really.

The variable @code{ekg-format-funcs} has functions to run to format what ekg displays
to the user.  Each format function runs in turn on a temporary buffer with the
note text in it, and can make whatever changes it needs to before the buffer's
contents are displayed in a note list.

@node Magic tags
@chapter Magic tags

Sometimes you want to have behaviors that are associated with particular tags.
For example, if some of your notes are in Chinese, you may want to tag them all
with the same tag.  Going further, it would be nice if all notes tagged with
"chinese" had your favorite Chinese input method on by default.  With magic
tags, you can enable this tag-based customization.

This works in a similar manner to @ref{Templates, , templates}, except that a template tag only
takes effect when you add it, while a magic tag takes effect both when first
adding it and when editing a note with the tag.  But they also share the same
shortcoming: if the tag is a prefix, it will trigger as soon as typed, even if
you wanted to use a different tag that is prefixed with the tag.

Creating magic tags is also like creating templates.  You create a note and use
a special tag that indicates this tag is a magic tag.  That special tag is
"tag-defun" (but the name can be changed by customizing the variable
@samp{ekg-function-tag}).  This tag is itself a "magic tag", and once you add it to a
note, the note will change to be in @samp{emacs-lisp-mode}.  Notes co-tagged with
this will take effect for any notes with those co-tags (again, just like
templates).  For this reason, it's probably best to avoid having any date tags
co-tagged, since users probably don't want them to be magic tags.  To illustrate
the example that in this section, you could have a note with tags "chinese" and
"tag-defun".  This note could have the following content:

@lisp
(set-input-method 'chinese-b5-quick)
@end lisp

@noindent
In this example, once a note is added with "chinese", this function will be run,
and all subsequent editing of the note will have this function run.  Note that
there can be only one elisp expression in the note; if you have multiple, only
the first will be used.  It is not advised to have complicated elisp here, since
it is not amenable to debugging.  The code is run in the context of the note
buffer, after the text has been inserted.

For tags that are a hierarchy, each level in the hierarchy is tried in order,
from least specific to most specific.  So, for example, if the tag was
"chinese/writing practice", first we would try "chinese", apply any functions
found there, then try "chinese/writing practice", and apply any functions found
there.

@node The trash
@chapter The trash

Notes deleted from note lists (@samp{ekg-notes-mode}) buffers are not deleted outright,
but rather put in the trash, which is done by adding the @samp{ekg-trash-tag}, by
default, "trash", to the note. Any note with the "trash" tag will not be shown
in normal tag buffers.

Trashed notes can be seen by calling @samp{ekg-show-notes-in-trash}. If notes are
deleted from this list via @samp{ekg-notes-delete} again, they are deleted permanently.
The function @samp{ekg-notes-delete} will always delete a note if the note is in the
trash, and trash it otherwise. If you want to un-trash the note, you can remove
the trash tag.

@node Links to ekg in org-mode
@chapter Links to ekg in org-mode

Both notes in ekg and certain note list buffers can be stored and linked to in
org-mode.  To store a link to a note, you have to edit that note and call
@samp{org-store-link}.  That function can also be called in a @samp{ekg-notes-mode} buffer
created by @samp{ekg-show-notes-with-any-tags}.  Other list types currently will just
store their tags assuming the user wants a link to a list with any of the tags
in the list.

@node Importing from org-roam
@chapter Importing from org-roam

You can import your notes from org-roam.  This will turn all titles into tags,
and all links will become tags as well, as well as any tags org-roam thought
were in the document.  At the moment, the import is started via executing elisp,
since importing can be fairly idiosyncratic, and ekg and org-roam have different
ways of expressing the same thing that you may want to change.  It's best if you
looked over @samp{ekg-org-roam.el} and see what is going on, but at least read the
following description before manually executing @code{(ekg-org-roam-import)}.

The import is idempotent, so it always will import to the same entities,
overwriting older data with new data.  If you want to update what is in ekg, you
can just rerun the import.  In the import, titles and links will be normalized
to ekg's tag format (they will be downcased and have any commas removed).  If
you have tags you want to turn into prefixes (which is a good idea for tags
widely applied, which essentially act as a categorization), you can add those
tags to the list at @code{ekg-org-roam-import-tag-to-prefix}.  For example,

@lisp
(setq ekg-org-roam-import-tag-to-prefix (append ekg-org-roam-import-tag-to-prefix '("idea" "person")))
@end lisp

Then, when a note is found that is tagged with "idea", but with title "emacs is
a powerful tool", then the title in org-roam will be turned into the ekg tag
"idea/emacs is a powerful tool", and anything linked to it will also get the
same prefix.

@node Backups
@chapter Backups

By default, the ekg package will back up its database, using the backup
functionality built into the triples library.  The backup behavior is controlled
by @code{ekg-default-num-backups}, set to @samp{5} by default, and
@code{ekg-default-backups-strategy}, set to @samp{daily}.  These are, on first use of ekg,
stored in the database itself, but it can be set again at any time by running:

@lisp
(triples-backups-setup ekg-db ekg-default-num-backups ekg-default-backups-strategy)
@end lisp

The strategy can be one of the defaults of @samp{daily}, @samp{weekly}, @samp{every-change}, or
@samp{never}, and new methods can be defined as well.  See the implementation in
@samp{triples-backups.el} for more information.

@node Database maintenance
@chapter Database maintenance

You may occasionally notice that certain tags are obsolete and have no notes, or
notes exist that are empty, or various other annoyances.  You can call
@samp{ekg-clean-db}, which will:

@itemize
@item
First, force a backup.
@item
Remove all tags with no uses.
@item
Remove notes with no text, or just a "*", which is something that often
happens with org-mode buffers.
@end itemize

Tags may need to be renamed because the concept has changed in some way.  The
command @samp{ekg-global-rename-tag} can quickly rename one tag to another globally
across the database, so all tags with the old tag now have the new tag.  (Note
that the new tag may already exist, in which case this operation cannot be
easily undone.)

@node Customizing ekg with hooks
@chapter Customizing ekg with hooks

You can customize the behavior of ekg in a number of ways.

First, you can create your own schema to store your own data.  The hook
@code{ekg-add-schema-hook} is called whenver the database is connected to.  At that
point, ekg adds all of its schema, and runs the hooks in this variable.  Adding
schema is idempotent, so it can be called any number of times without causing
problems.  Adding schema can be done by calling the triples library.  For
details on how to create schema, you can either look at the ekg implementation
for example, or the triples library README for an overview of how it works.

The @code{ekg-note-pre-save-hook} is called before saving a note, and
@code{ekg-note-save-hook} is called after saving, but in the same database
transaction as the save.

The @code{ekg-note-delete-hook} is called when deleting a note.

The @code{ekg-note-add-tag-hook} is called when adding a tag, either via the initial
tags added to a new note, or tags added after completing a new tag in the note's
property list.

@node Integration with ekg
@chapter Integration with ekg

The ekg package is designed to be easy to integrate with.  For example, if you
want to create a note automatically in one of your functions, you can write:

@lisp
(defun my/log-to-ekg (text)
  "Log TEXT as a note to EKG's date"
  (ekg-save-note (ekg-note-create :text text :mode 'text-mode :tags `(,(ekg-tag-for-date) "log"))))
@end lisp

@noindent
If you wanted to re-use an existing note and append to it, you can do that as well.

@lisp
(defun my/log-to-ekg (text)
  "Log TEXT as a note to EKG's date, appending if possible."
  (let ((notes (ekg-get-notes-with-tags (list (ekg-tag-for-date) "log"))))
    (if notes
        (progn
          (setf (ekg-note-text (car notes)) (concat (ekg-note-text (car notes)) "\n" text))
          (ekg-save-note (car notes)))
      (ekg-save-note (ekg-note-create :text text :mode 'text-mode :tags `(,(ekg-tag-for-date) "log"))))))
@end lisp

There isn't a special API, but the basic defuns such as @code{ekg-save-note},
@code{ekg-note-create-text}, @code{ekg-get-notes-with-tags}, @code{ekg-get-note-with-id}, along
with the struct @code{ekg-note} are good starting points.  Capturing notes in
different ways can be done by wrapping @code{ekg-capture}, and is how functions such
as @code{ekg-capture-url} work.

@noindent
If you add schema and you want the user to be able to modify it, you should
supply new alist entries to @code{ekg-metadata-parsers} and @code{ekg-metadata-labels}.

@noindent
Because inline commands exist, the complete text of a note should be retrieved
with @code{ekg-display-note}.  The function @code{ekg-note-text}, will only get the text
as stored, which is missing mode related text properties and any text generated
from inline commands.

@node Extras
@chapter Extras

The ekg module can have any number of functionality additions.  These may appear
as other packages with other maintainers, but some are included as part of this
package.

@menu
* Embeddings::
* Logseq::
* LLM::
* Auto save::
* Denote::
* Email::
@end menu

@node Embeddings
@section Embeddings

The embeddings functionality, for integration with an LLM, can be turned on by
requiring the ekg-embeddings file and enabling it, such as:

@lisp
(require 'ekg-embedding)
(ekg-embedding-generate-on-save)
@end lisp

This module contains functionality to explore similar notes and search using
techniques associated with large language models.  Embeddings let you do
searches at a semantic level, based on an understood meaning that is separate
from the words used.  For example, if I have a note with a recipe for linguini,
embeddings will let me see that it is similar to notes about spaghetti, and not
similar to notes about cold fusion.  Because the search is not based on words,
but meaning derived from those words, notes that describe the same thing in two
different languages should be very similar.  In ekg these let you find notes
similar to a current note, or in fact any buffer.  You can also do a query via
embeddings.

The idea behind an embedding is that it is an abstract representation of text,
represented as a multi-dimensional vector.  Because it is just a vector, you can
compare the distance between different embeddings, and embedding vectors that
are similar should represent similar concepts.  This can be used to find similar
notes, but also to search, where the search string is transformed into an
embedding.

The embedding interfaces with your preferred LLM provider via the @samp{llm} package.
This package allows the user to define their preferred llm backends, which will
be stored in @code{ekg-llm-provider}.  Please see the @uref{https://github.com/ahyatt/llm, LLM module project page} for a
complete description on how to do this, but an example would be the following:

@lisp
(use-package ekg
  :init
  (require 'llm-openai)  ;; the specific LLM provider must be required
  (require 'ekg-embedding)
  (ekg-embedding-generate-on-save)
  (let ((my-provider (make-llm-openai :key "my-openai-api-key")))
    (setq ekg-llm-provider my-provider
          ekg-embedding-provider my-provider)))
@end lisp

The embedding provider must be the same for all notes.  If you want to switch to
a new provider, you will need to call @samp{ekg-embedding-generate-all} with a prefix
argument (@samp{C-u M-x ekg-embedding-generate-all}), which will regenerate all
embeddings asynchronously.  The embedding provider does not have to be the same
as the LLM provider (if you also use the @ref{LLM} add-on.)  Also note that the
provider will get the text of all your notes, so if that bothers you, do not use
any provider on a server.

Once you have this set up, and you have already called @code{(require
'ekg-embedding)} and @code{(ekg-embedding-generate-on-save)} you can call @samp{M-x
ekg-embedding-generate-all}.  This may take a long time as each embedding has to
be generated separately with its own API call.  Once you've done this, you can
call, in @samp{ekg-notes-mode}, @samp{ekg-embedding-show-similar} to get a list of similar
notes.  You can also call @samp{ekg-embedding-search} to perform a search over your
notes using embeddings.  In any buffer, you can call
@samp{ekg-embedding-show-similar-to-current-buffer} to show notes similar to whatever
the text is in the current buffer.

The variable @samp{ekg-embedding-text-selector} has a function that will pre-process
all text that is sent for embeddings.  The default value is
@samp{ekg-embedding-text-selector-initial}, which will estimate the size of the
tokens sent and limit the text to the first 8k tokens.  Right now the function
is tuned to the limits of Open AI's embedding framework, and a different
function may be needed for other embedding APIs.

If you would like to stop generating embeddings for notes in a session, you can
call @code{(ekg-embedding-disable-generate-on-save)}.

@node Logseq
@section Logseq

ekg can sync with logseq, a PKMS application that can run on a laptop or phone.
Logseq is particularly convenient as a way to view or enter notes on your phone,
and various synchronization solutions exist to sync local files with your phone.
Because ekg and logseq have different designs, these apps are not perfectly
compatible.  The ekg and logseq syncing is designed to favor ekg's system when a
conflict arises.

There are two ways to use logseq with ekg.  One is maintaining logseq as an
export-only copy of ekg data, where you don't plan to modify anything in logseq,
just using it to access your notes on other platforms.  Exporting from ekg is
destructive, though, so without an initial import, @strong{exporting will overwrite
logseq files with data from ekg, so it may destroy data}.  The other way is to
sync bidirectionally.  This starts by importing anything from logseq that has
never been imported before, and then writing ekg's data on top.  This will
preserve data, but will lose the initial ordering of pages.  Both of these
methods, then, will significantly impact your logseq notes.  @strong{It is highly
advised to back up your logseq files before starting}.

To export to logseq, start by requiring the @samp{ekg-logseq} module and setting up
@code{ekg-logseq-dir}, which points to the base directory of your logseq data (where
there is a "pages" and "journals" directory):
@lisp
(require 'ekg-logseq)
(setq ekg-logseq-dir "~/my/logseq")
@end lisp

If you wish to maintain logseq as a read-only copy of ekg, just run
@samp{ekg-logseq-export} when you wish to export data.  This currently may take a few
seconds to a minute, depending on how much data you have.  We attempt to not
write any files that are unchanged.  To have a bidirectional synchronization,
run @samp{ekg-logseq-sync}, which will first import data from logseq, then export
data.

@menu
* Exporting::
* Importing::
@end menu

@node Exporting
@subsection Exporting

When exporting, it's important to understand the differences between ekg and
logseq.  Logseq is organized by pages, where one page is one file.  Within the
page there are many sections, which can be individually referenced.  The ekg
integration treats logseq pages like ekg tags, and logseq sections like ekg
notes.  In logseq, the user mostly sees one page at a time.  In ekg, notes are
shown in a variety of contexts, mostly tag related, but not always.  In logseq,
a note lives in one page and is referenced from other pages.  In ekg, each note
has its own identity and is tied to other notes solely via the tags it shares
with them.  To compensate for this difference, we export notes based on their
first non-date tag as the page where the text will apear, and reference other
tags, where they will appear as backlinks.  In addition, in org-mode, notes in a
page appear as top-level outlines, which are supposed to have text for the
outline node.  If there is an ekg note with a title, the title will appear as
the text, otherwise the outline node will just read "Untitled note".  Because
this initial headline is where various properties are stored, and is followed
immediately by tags, it makes sense that this is a title instead of just part of
the content.

@noindent
For example, take the following note:
@example
Tags: date/2023-04-05, ekg, logseq

ekg can export into logseq!
@end example

@noindent
This will be exported into "pages/ekg.org":

@example
#+title: ekg

* Untitled note
:PROPERTIES:
:ID: 33134561605
:EKG_HASH: 89471eadbd7cc56b088f5513c11f68cb1d11d045
:END:
#[[2023-04-05]] #[[logseq]]
ekg can export into logseq
@end example

@noindent
Each node points to its ID which is from ekg (but, if it was originally
imported, the ekg ID might originally be from logseq).  We also encode the hash
of the exported data.  This is to keep track of what was exported, so we do not
re-import it unless it has changed.  For now, even if the data is changed, it is
not re-imported.  Files for "pages/logseq.org" and "journals/2023-04-05" will
also be created, although they won't have any content from this note.

@noindent
When exporting, inline commands (see @ref{Inline commands, , inlines} section), are evaluated before
exporting to logseq, with the exception of note transclusions, which turn into
logseq embeds to the same ID@.  So, other kinds of transclusions or any other
commands will evaluate to whatever text they normally evaluate to when viewing
the note before exporting to logseq.  For example, if the note has a file
tranclusion inline command, the file contents will be exported to logseq.
Logseq embeds are roughly equivalent to note transclusions, but only roughly,
since a key difference is that logseq embeds occupy their own lines and appear
visually distinct, and ekg transclusions don't.  Because of this, some
formatting strangeness between the two may happen.

@node Importing
@subsection Importing

@noindent
Imports from logseq will return all top-level items as separate notes.  So, for
example, assuming we're reading from the logseq file "pages/logseq.org":

@example
* This is my first time trying logseq  #testing
* The org compatibility here is especially nice  #org

   It really helps me feel comfortable in using the various formatting options I had gotten used to.
@end example

@noindent
This will turn into two notes, one that has text "* This is my first time trying
logseq #testing", and with tags @samp{logseq}, and @samp{testing}, and the other with the
rest of the text, with the tags @samp{logseq} and @samp{org}.

@noindent
There are a few things to be aware of.  In logseq, any level of the hierarchy
can have an id and be referenced separately.  In ekg, we don't support notes
inside of other notes, so these will be imported in the context of the parent
note, and won't be available to reference as its own separate note.  Also,
logseq has other functionality not supported by ekg, such as queries and
potentially anything provided by plugins.  These will be imported as-is to ekg,
but without any corresponding functionality.

@noindent
Logseq embeds are imported as note transclusions.

@node LLM
@section LLM

@noindent
The ekg-llm module provides a second way to use large language models (LLMs)
with ekg, separately from the ekg-embeddings integration.  While the
ekg-embeddings module lets you find notes based on their meanings, the ekg-llm
module lets you prompt an LLM with the contents of a note, and then capture the
LLM's response in the note.

As with ekg-embeddings, this is based on the @samp{llm} package, which allows the
user to define their preferred llm backends, which will be stored in
@code{ekg-llm-provider}.  Please see the @uref{https://github.com/ahyatt/llm, LLM module project page} for a complete
description of how to do this, but an example would be the following:

@lisp
(use-package ekg
  :init
  (require 'llm-openai)  ;; the specific LLM provider must be required
  (let ((my-provider (make-llm-openai :key "my-openai-api-key")))
    (setq ekg-llm-provider my-provider
          ekg-embedding-provider my-provider)))
@end lisp

The embedding and LLM providers can be different.  The LLM provider can change
at will, while the embedding provider must be the same for all embeddings in the
database.  It is necessary to create both of these providers, because some LLM
functionality depends on having embeddings.

@menu
* Augmenting notes with LLM output::
* Using ekg notes as prompts::
* Querying your ekg database::
@end menu

@node Augmenting notes with LLM output
@subsection Augmenting notes with LLM output

To send a note to an LLM and capture its response, call
@samp{ekg-llm-send-and-append-note}, which is by default bound to @samp{[C-c .]}.  A
prefix argument (@samp{[C-u C-c .]}) will let you edit the prompt before it is sent.
The output from the LLM is appended at the end of the note, in a special
section.

In addition to the contents of the note, ekg will construct a larger prompt for
the LLM@.  The prompt consists of context about previous notes that contain the
tags of your note, and similar notes, which is what will generate high-quality
content that is appropriate in the context of your notes.  It also contains
instructions to the LLM to how to generate the note text to be added or
replaced. The default instructions are a fixed string you can configure in
@code{ekg-llm-default-instructions}.  But alternatively, you can create alternative
prompts for different ekg tags in the same way that @ref{Templates, , templates} work, by creating
a note tagged with "prompt" and any other tag (the special "prompt" tag can be
changed by customizing @code{ekg-llm-prompt-tag}).  The alternate prompt is created by
appending all "prompt"-tagged notes.  Note that, as with templates, hierarchical
tags can have prompts attached at any or all levels of the hierarchy.

To take an example, imagine that you have a note tagged with @samp{prompt} and @samp{recipe},
containing instructions saying the LLM should imagine itself an authority on
cooking and provide you helpful tips to improve your recipes.  You then create a
note with a child tag of @samp{recipe}, let's say @samp{recipe/monkfish}, with some details of
your attempt to cook monkfish, and then hit @samp{[C-c .]}.  Because @samp{recipe} is a parent
of @samp{recipe/monkfish}, ekg-llm will use these instructions instead of the default
one, and will also append your note, and place the LLM's response in a special
section at the end of your note.  For example:

@example
Making monkfish again.  It is thick but tends to be wet and hard to get a good
sear on.  Maybe I should sous vide it and then blast it with the searzall torch?

#+BEGIN_LLM_OUTPUT
Monkfish can indeed be challenging to sear properly due to its high water
content.  Sous-vide cooking followed by searing with a torch can be a great
technique to achieve the desired result.  The sous-vide process will help to cook
the fish evenly and retain moisture, while the searzall torch can give it a
beautiful caramelized crust.  Just be sure to pat the fish dry before searing for
better browning and use high heat to quickly sear the exterior without
overcooking the inside.  Happy cooking!
#+END_LLM_OUTPUT
@end example

Instead of appending, the note can be replaced with the output of the LLM by
using @samp{ekg-llm-send-and-replace-note} which is bound to @samp{[C-c ,]}.  As with the
append command, using a prefix argument will let you edit the instructions
before sending it.

All prompts sent from a note in org or markdown modes have a prelude that notes
the format of the input and expected output.  However, LLMs typically will
produce markdown regardless of what you ask it to do, so if you want to use
LLMs, you may want to use markdown as a default note format.

@node Using ekg notes as prompts
@subsection Using ekg notes as prompts

ekg notes are especially well suited for LLM prompting, both because of the
ability to create prompts for different tags, and the ability to transclude one
note's contents within another note.  While each "prompt"-tagged note should
work as a standalone LLM prompt, it may be helpful to build up a set of partial
prompts that you can share among many full prompts using transclusion.

For example, imagine a prompt that is designed to give an Aristotelian response
to a note.  A note with tags "aristotle" and "prompt" could have the basics:
"You are Aristotle.  Give a response to the note using Aristotle's writing style
and ideas, referencing existing works when possible."  But perhaps you also want
some standard behaviors found in other prompts, such as a prompt to encourage
the LLM to ask you questions when appropriate.  There may be many prompts in
which that sub-prompt may be applicable.  You can use transclusion @ref{Inline commands, , inlines} for
this, adding the transclusion to the appropriate part of the prompt.  You can
then iterate on each sub-part, trying to get the best behavior.

Additionally, transclusion or other inline commands could help in other ways in
forming the prompt, by sharing your schedule, or your current org agenda items
as context to the LLM when it is necessary.  These advanced uses will require
inline commands that are not part of the base ekg package, but once written,
they can be seamlessly used in prompts.

@node Querying your ekg database
@subsection Querying your ekg database

If you also use embeddings, you can use the interactive function
@samp{ekg-llm-query-with-notes} to find your notes that best match a query, and send
the LLM a prompt consisting of those notes.  This essentially will let your
notes act as a natural language queryable knowledge base.  It will work for
queries in which you have the relevant information.  The answer to the query
will appear in a new buffer.

The initial part of the prompt instructing the LLM for this case is defined in
@samp{ekg-llm-query-prompt-intro}.  This can be changed to tune how the LLM responds
to the query.

Note that anything in your database could potentially be retrieved and sent to
the LLM, so if you have notes that you consider too private to send for
processing, you may not want to use this.

@node Auto save
@section Auto save

The @samp{ekg-auto-save} module is useful for users who enter longer notes, so that the notes are protected against accidentally killing the buffer, or emacs crashing, or any similar problem.  It is designed to work similarly to the built-in auto-save functionality, and has it's own variables that default to the auto-save equivalent.  So, for example, there is @code{ekg-auto-save-timeout}, which defaults to the value of @code{auto-save-timeout}.

To start using this, you need to require the module and turn on @samp{ekg-auto-save-mode} in the @samp{ekg-edit-mode` and =ekg-capture-mode}.  For example:
@lisp
(require 'ekg-auto-save)
(add-hook 'ekg-capture-mode-hook 'ekg-auto-save-mode)
(add-hook 'ekg-edit-mode-hook 'ekg-auto-save-mode)
@end lisp

In the capture mode, this. is equivalent to saving periodically (to drafts).  In edit mode, it will save the latest version while editing.

@node Denote
@section Denote

ekg can export notes as denotes. Denote is a note taking and file
naming tool. Primary reason for export is taking backup of your notes
in a git backed repository. Import is in road map (PR is welcome). To
export to denote, @samp{ekg-denote} module is required.

@lisp
(use-package ekg-denote
  :init
  (setq ekg-denote-export-add-front-matter nil)
  (setq ekg-denote-export-backup-on-conflict t)
  (setq ekg-denote-export-title-max-len 50)
  (setq ekg-denote-export-combined-keywords-len 150))
@end lisp

To export, call @samp{ekg-denote-export} which will export any modified
note after the last export as a denote in the @samp{denote-directory}
defined by @samp{denote} package. If it is your first time exporting, all
the notes will be exported to the @samp{denote-directory}.

@samp{ekg-denote} keeps record of the last export time in the ekg db and
use that to find the notes changed since last export. This way the
exports are much faster. It is suggested to export your notes every
day.

User can optionally enable adding of denote front-matter to exported
denotes by setting @samp{ekg-denote-export-add-front-matter} to
@samp{t}. Denote front matter is added using @samp{denote-add-front-matter}
function defined by @samp{denote} package which open note in an emacs
buffer and requires manual execution of @samp{save-buffer} by the user.

Ekg and denote have differences, due to which following customization
are made available:

@itemize
@item
@samp{ekg-denote-export-title-max-len} to trim the title during export. Default
is 50 characters.
@item
@samp{ekg-denote-export-combined-keywords-len} to trim the combined length of
keywords. Default is 150 characters.
@item
@samp{ekg-denote-export-backup-on-conflict} to backup the denote if both
ekg and denote are found to be updated after last export. Default is
@samp{t}.
@end itemize

It is user responsibility to backup the denotes before and after
export to protect against accidental deletes. This can be easily done
by keeping denotes in a git repository and making sure to check-in any
changes before and after export.

If ekg and denote are both found to be updated after the last export
which should ideally not happen, denote is updated with ekg. A backup
is taken based on @samp{ekg-denote-export-backup-on-conflict} setting.

@node Email
@section Email

The @samp{ekg-email} module adds schema for storing the @samp{to}, @samp{from}, and @samp{cc} email
addresses associated with an email, and a way to import an email into notes from
Gnus.  Other importing methods may be available in the future.

While in a Gnus article buffer, you can execute the command @samp{ekg-email-from-gnus}.

Once mails are imported, you can search for email addresses associated with them with @samp{ekg-email-show-notes-with-address}.

@node Design
@chapter Design

@menu
* The triple database::
* The metadata section::
@end menu

@node The triple database
@section The triple database

The ekg package uses the triples package to interface with a sqlite database.
The reason a database is useful, even for text, is because databases are
extremely fast, very flexible, and extremely easy to change.  In general, the
less your data looks like just files with text in them, the more a database
makes sense.  In ekg, we can separate the notion of tags from the text, which
makes writing functions such as @samp{ekg-global-rename-tag} trivial, and the
execution extremely fast.

The decision to use the triples package, though, is related to a different
design choice.  In a triple-based system, there's only one database table with
four columns, a @samp{subject}, @samp{predicate}, @samp{object}, and @samp{properties}.  One way to
think of this schema is that it defines links of different types from a subject
to an object.  This is combined with a schema, itself defined in triples.  The
triples define that subjects can have types, and those types can have
properties.  Those properties are expressed in this triple format.  In ekg, the
subjects correspond to the IDs of the notes, or tags.  Subjects can have
multiple types, and data is factored into types that belong together, with a
specific meaning.  To give an example, listing out the data for a note might
look something like:

@example
33204698034|base/type|tagged|()
33204698034|tagged/tag|"date/2022-11-06"|(:index 0)
33204698034|tagged/tag|"lentil stew"|(:index 1)
33204698034|base/type|text|()
33204698034|text/text|"Made a great lentil stew with dried porcini mushrooms and delicata squash."
33204698034|text/mode|org-mode|()
33204698034|base/type|time-tracked|()
33204698034|time-tracked/creation-time|1667787928|()
33204698034|time-tracked/modified-time|1667787986|()
@end example

In this example, @samp{33204698034} is the ID for this note.  It has a type
(@samp{base/type}), of @samp{tagged}, which means this is something that has tags.  The
tags are a list, so the properties contain their index in the list.  Because
each one is stored individually, we can easily find all entities with each tag,
by querying on all subjects with a particular object value.  This is how reverse
links work in the triples package.  In this case, there are two tags,
"date/2022-11-06", and "lentil stew".  The note comes from another type, @samp{text}.
And yet another important property, the modification time, is on yet another
type, @samp{time-tracked}.  These are all independent.  It is possible to have
subjects that have tags but not text, although this doesn't happen currently in
ekg.  It's also possible to have any object have a creation and modified time.

Using a triples scheme has the advantage that it is very easy to integrate with.
All data is very "flat", without having to worry about tables and their schemas.
The uniformity means that it lends itself well to integrations, which typically
would provide a new type and new data.  The disadvantage is that it is typically
less efficient to query, at least for more complicated queries.  On databases
that typically will be used with ekg, this should be not noticeable.

IDs, stored as subjects, can be resources.  This is useful when we want to store
data about some unique thing, such as an URL@.  Because triples define a graph,
every object can be a subject.  For an example, if some data in the graph has a
value of "@uref{http://emacs.org}", then we can attach more data to that value, such as
tags, notes or anything else.  This is how we store notes about web pages
(@samp{ekg-capture-url}).  Having IDs that are meaningful is also useful to enforce
unique data, and force that data isn't duplicated.  For example, with this
design, you couldn't have both a "tag" entity and a "page" entity that are
separate: if they are the same object value, they will be the same subject, with
the same ID@.  This leads, in our opinion, to a better design.  Also it's useful
to note that IDs can be anything, even different types of objects.  Integers,
strings, symbols.  This is useful, because objects can be anything.  Because of
the design of the triple database, all data can be expanded on with their own
data, and that data itself expanded on.  This seems like a useful property to
have for a personal knowledge system.

@node The metadata section
@section The metadata section

Because the user may want to modify or create both the text and other database
properties at the same time, we use a single buffer that lets the user do both.
Because of this design choice, we have to divide the buffer up into two
sections: a metadata section and the text section.  The metadata section is on
top, and has a specific format.  Because of this, some @samp{org-mode} functions may
not work correctly, because they assume the whole buffer is an org-mode file.
Without this design, however, it isn't clear how the user could easily see and
modify everything they need.  Theoretically, having another window might work,
but this would add other complications: the user might not want several windows,
the user might select or bury one of them, and more.  There isn't an obvious
ideal solution.  It's possible that the design of the capture/edit buffer may
change in the future to fix some of the issues we see with the current
implementation.

@bye
